export const CAPACITY_MHA_MODEL_ANSWER_REPLACEMENTS = [
  {
    id: "CAP-001",
    modelAnswer: `Mr Howard's refusal of dialysis cannot be treated as a simple autonomous refusal, because the stem shows several reasons why his decision-making is likely impaired and time-critical. The phrase "The dialysis machine is a punishment device and you are trying to drain me dry" is not merely an eccentric way of describing treatment; it suggests that his refusal is being shaped by confused or persecutory beliefs about the nature and purpose of dialysis. He also "cannot explain what potassium is or what may happen without dialysis," which means the assessment must focus on decision-specific capacity to refuse dialysis, especially understanding, retention, appreciation and weighing of the immediate risk. I would not ask the renal team to accept or override the refusal until I had made that capacity judgement in relation to this specific decision at this specific time.

The medical urgency matters because the renal consultant says dialysis is "needed tonight." In a patient admitted with fluid overload and hyperkalaemia, delay may carry a risk of arrhythmia, death or irreversible harm. I would therefore immediately clarify with the renal team the exact urgency, alternatives to dialysis, likely outcome if delayed, whether temporising measures are possible, and whether there is time to optimise Mr Howard's cognition before treatment. The capacity assessment cannot be conducted in isolation from the medical facts, because a person may need a different level of appreciation to refuse a treatment that is optional next week compared with one that may prevent death tonight.

I would also assess for delirium superimposed on dementia, because the stem states that at times he recognises his daughter but "later asks why his deceased wife has not visited." That fluctuation strongly suggests an acute confusional component, especially in a medically unwell older man. If delirium is contributing, I would ask the medical team to address reversible precipitants such as infection, uraemia, electrolyte disturbance, pain, constipation, hypoxia and medication effects, while recognising that the emergency may not allow prolonged delay. Capacity may fluctuate, but if dialysis is required tonight and he currently lacks capacity, the team needs a lawful emergency or substitute decision pathway rather than waiting passively.

The family conflict must be managed but not allowed to replace the capacity assessment. The daughter holds enduring power of attorney and says, "Dad always said he never wanted machines keeping him alive." That is clinically and ethically relevant, but I would explore whether that prior statement referred to burdensome long-term life support in an end-of-life context or to potentially reversible emergency dialysis in acute renal deterioration. The son says, "You have to do everything or I'll complain." That increases medico-legal pressure but does not alter the clinical or legal test. I would meet or speak with both children, clarify the daughter's legal authority and the scope of the EPOA, explain the medical urgency, and make clear that the decision will be based on Mr Howard's capacity, best interests or substituted judgement under the relevant law, not on whichever family member applies most pressure.

If Mr Howard lacks capacity and dialysis is immediately necessary to prevent serious harm, I would advise the team to proceed under the appropriate emergency treatment or substitute decision framework in the jurisdiction, while using the least restrictive and most dignified method possible. The clue that he is "repeatedly pulling at his cannula" means coercion, restraint or sedation may become part of the practical treatment question, not just the legal one. I would first attempt explanation in simple language, a calm environment, familiar staff or daughter presence if helpful, attention to pain and distress, and de-escalation. If restraint or sedation is required to deliver life-saving treatment, it should be proportionate, time-limited, monitored, documented and reviewed, not used simply because the ward is frustrated.

My role as consultant is to make the reasoning explicit and defensible under pressure. I would document the exact capacity findings, the medical urgency behind "dialysis is needed tonight," the delirium features, the discussion with the EPOA daughter and disagreeing son, the legal basis for proceeding or not proceeding, the least restrictive measures attempted, and the risks of both treatment and non-treatment. The son's threat "I'll complain" should prompt better documentation and communication, not defensive medicine. The ethically correct position is to respect capacitous refusal if present, but if capacity is absent and the risk is imminent, to act lawfully and proportionately to prevent avoidable death while still honouring Mr Howard's dignity and previously expressed values as far as possible.`,
  },
  {
    id: "CAP-002",
    modelAnswer: `Leila's presentation should be managed as a medically dangerous overdose with an unreliable refusal, not as a straightforward question of whether an articulate 16-year-old can repeat information. The registrar's question about Gillick competence is appropriate, but the conclusion cannot be based on the fact that she is articulate. Her statement, "I understand my liver could fail, but that is my choice," shows factual repetition of risk, but capacity in this context requires more than repeating the words "liver could fail." I would assess whether she can appreciate that this risk applies personally to her, weigh survival against the wish not to wake up, and make a stable decision not driven by acute suicidal crisis, shame, fear or hopelessness.

The medical issue is urgent because "the timing of ingestion is unclear." With an uncertain paracetamol overdose, delayed blood tests or delayed NAC can result in preventable hepatic failure. I would therefore advise the ED team that medical stabilisation and toxicology management must proceed in parallel with psychiatric assessment. I would not allow the search for a perfect capacity opinion to delay time-critical treatment. The immediate actions are safe observation, prevention of absconding, toxicology advice, paracetamol level and relevant bloods, NAC if indicated, and senior ED/paediatric involvement. If she refuses these interventions and lacks capacity, or if emergency treatment law applies because of imminent serious harm, the team should use the appropriate legal pathway to provide life-saving care.

Her risk cannot be minimised because she later told nursing staff, "I took enough to sleep and maybe not wake up." That phrase is clinically important because it shows at least ambivalent suicidal intent after an initial denial of overdose. Initial concealment followed by partial disclosure makes self-report less reliable, and her current refusal of treatment may be part of the same wish not to survive. I would assess intent, planning, access to further medication, triggers, shame, bullying or abuse, family conflict, mood symptoms, substance use, prior self-harm, protective factors and her ability to collaborate with safety. I would also clarify whether the boarding school context creates isolation, access to medication, academic pressure or family separation issues.

The legal tension is between respecting the developing autonomy of a 16-year-old and protecting her from a state-dependent refusal following a potentially lethal overdose. Her anger that "No one has the right to lock me up" should be acknowledged, not dismissed, because coercion can damage trust. However, if her ability to weigh information is impaired by suicidal intent or acute mental disorder, then her refusal of blood tests, NAC and admission may not be capacitous. Depending on the jurisdiction, the team may need to consider Gillick competence, parental or guardian involvement, emergency medical treatment powers, child protection or Mental Health Act assessment. I would supervise the registrar to frame this as lawful least-restrictive protection, not punishment.

Collateral needs to be broadened because the aunt's view that Leila is "dramatic but clever" and should be discharged if she promises to be safe is not an adequate safety assessment. A promise of safety is especially weak when the patient has taken an uncertain overdose, initially denied it and is refusing treatment. I would obtain collateral from the aunt, school, GP, parents or guardians where appropriate, and any prior mental health providers, while considering Leila's confidentiality and safety. The teacher has returned to the boarding school, which means the immediate support structure may be thin; I would clarify who can actually supervise her tonight and whether discharge would return her to a safe environment.

I would not discharge Leila simply because she can repeat medical risks or promises to be safe. Disposition requires medical clearance, completion of necessary overdose treatment, a defensible suicide-risk formulation, a safe adult supervision plan, means restriction, communication with guardians or statutory supports as required, and CAMHS follow-up or admission depending on ongoing risk. If she continues to refuse life-saving treatment and the assessment indicates impaired capacity, I would support proportionate treatment under the relevant emergency or mental health legal framework. My documentation would explicitly state why "I understand my liver could fail" did or did not amount to capacity, why the unclear ingestion timing changed urgency, how her statement "maybe not wake up" affected suicide-risk formulation, what collateral was obtained, and why the final disposition was the least restrictive safe option.`,
  },
  {
    id: "CAP-003",
    modelAnswer: `Sam's CTO renewal should not proceed by habit or defensive practice, because the stem contains strong evidence that the least restrictive question has not been properly tested. He has been "stable for 18 months," lives independently and works part-time, and his sister reports that he has been "reliable with appointments" and abstinent from cannabis for over a year. Those facts do not prove that the CTO should end, but they make automatic renewal legally and ethically weak. The most important governance clue is that "the team has not documented any recent attempt at a voluntary treatment plan." A CTO is coercive treatment in the community, and the tribunal will expect evidence that less restrictive alternatives have been actively considered rather than assumed to fail.

Sam's own words, "I only take the injection because you people threaten me with hospital," are central. They show that the treatment may be technically effective but experienced as coercive and alienating. I would explore this directly with him rather than treating it as simply poor insight. I would ask what he understands about his illness, what he thinks happened during previous relapses, what he fears about depot medication, what he would accept voluntarily, and what early warning signs or relapse plan he would agree to. The aim is not to pretend there is no relapse risk, but to see whether a collaborative plan can manage that risk without ongoing compulsion.

The relapse history remains relevant because the stem states there were "past relapses associated with stopping depot antipsychotic medication." A consultant-level answer must not swing from coercion to naïve autonomy. I would review the severity of those relapses, whether there was violence, self-neglect, hospitalisation, substance use, time to relapse, response to treatment and whether he had capacity during relapse. Historical risk is part of the statutory and clinical formulation. However, historical risk alone is not sufficient if current circumstances have changed and if a monitored voluntary plan is feasible. The team must weigh past relapse against current stability, work, abstinence, appointment adherence, supports and Sam's willingness to consider tablets.

His side effects also need to be treated as legitimate clinical issues, not obstacles to compliance. He reports "tiredness, sexual dysfunction and weight gain," all of which can erode quality of life, autonomy, physical health and engagement. Ignoring these side effects would make the CTO less defensible because it would suggest the service is imposing treatment without actively reducing burden. I would consider dose review, metabolic monitoring, sexual side-effect management, alternative antipsychotic options, depot versus oral formulation, and a negotiated trial of oral medication if the risk can be managed. If a CTO is still recommended, I would explain why the benefits outweigh these burdens and what is being done to reduce them.

The case manager's statement that "he will definitely relapse if we remove it" needs careful handling. It may reflect genuine concern, but the certainty and the phrase "definitely" also suggest risk aversion and fear of blame. I would lead an MDT review before the tribunal, asking the team to identify evidence rather than predictions: what exactly happened previously, what has changed, what early warning signs can be monitored, what supports exist, and what contingency plan would trigger rapid review. The ethical tension is between preventing relapse and avoiding unnecessary coercion. A consultant has to hold both, not simply choose the least risky option for the service.

My tribunal position would depend on this updated assessment. If the statutory criteria remain met because relapse risk is severe, insight is poor, voluntary adherence is not realistic and consequences of relapse are serious, I would recommend renewal but only with a clear plan to address side effects and move toward voluntary care. If the evidence supports a less restrictive plan, I would recommend step-down or non-renewal with intensive voluntary follow-up, relapse plan, sister involvement if Sam agrees, and rapid re-entry pathway. In either case, I would not tell the registrar that poor insight alone is enough. My documentation would record Sam's views, the coercion concern, side effects, relapse history, sister's collateral, voluntary alternatives considered, least restrictive reasoning and the precise rationale for whatever recommendation is made to the tribunal.`,
  },
  {
    id: "CAP-004",
    modelAnswer: `Omar's refusal of antipsychotic medication should be taken seriously, but it should not be mistaken for capacitous refusal simply because he can clearly say "no." The registrar's question is a common but dangerous simplification. The key stem clue is Omar's explanation that "The tablets are trackers that will let them control my thoughts." That is not a reasoned refusal based on side effects, past values or a balanced understanding of treatment. It strongly suggests that persecutory delusions are impairing his appreciation of what the medication is and his ability to weigh risks and benefits. I would therefore assess capacity specifically for refusing antipsychotic treatment, focusing on whether psychosis prevents him from understanding the nature and purpose of medication, the consequences of refusal, and the relationship between treatment and his current admission.

The urgency is increased because risk to others is already active on the ward. Omar was admitted involuntarily after "threatening neighbours with a metal pole," and nursing staff now report that he is standing over an elderly patient and saying, "You are one of them." That phrase suggests that his persecutory beliefs are being applied to vulnerable inpatients, which increases risk of defensive or pre-emptive aggression. I would not wait for a physical assault before acting. My immediate actions would be to review him urgently, increase observation, separate him from vulnerable patients where possible, reduce stimulation, ensure staff safety, and create a clear ward risk plan. The elderly patient and other inpatients are vulnerable third parties, so the decision is not only about Omar's autonomy.

Because he is "admitted involuntarily," I would clarify the statutory authority for treatment under the local Mental Health Act. Involuntary status may permit treatment for mental illness, but it does not remove the need for clinical necessity, proportionality, least restrictive practice and correct procedure. I would check whether additional second opinions, treatment authorisations, capacity documentation, medication forms or senior approvals are required locally. I would also ensure the team understands that forced medication is not justified merely because the unit is under pressure or staff are anxious. The question is whether medication is legally authorised, clinically necessary to treat mental illness and manage risk, and whether less restrictive options have been attempted.

I would use the father's collateral that Omar became unwell after "stopping risperidone depot three months ago" to build the treatment formulation, not as a substitute for Omar's current assessment. It suggests a relapse pattern after depot cessation and may inform medication choice, but I would still ask about prior response, side effects, reasons for stopping, physical health, substance use, and whether depot treatment remains appropriate. A consultant-level plan should not simply restart the old depot by force; it should consider therapeutic engagement, oral options, side-effect concerns, and a longer-term relapse-prevention strategy.

The team is asking whether "medication can be given by force tonight," and this is the ethical hinge. I would first attempt oral medication with a clear, non-argumentative explanation, offering choices where possible and avoiding confrontation with the delusion. If Omar refuses and continues to pose serious risk to others or is deteriorating, involuntary medication may be justified if the legal criteria are met. If physical restraint or IM medication is required, it must be the least restrictive effective intervention, properly staffed, physically monitored and documented. It should never be framed as punishment for refusal or as a way to make a full unit easier to manage.

The phrase "The unit is full" is relevant to operational stress but must not drive coercion. I would acknowledge staff strain while explicitly basing the decision on Omar's psychosis, impaired capacity, treatment need and risk to vulnerable patients. I would lead an MDT discussion so nursing staff, registrar and security understand the agreed plan, observation level, de-escalation approach, medication pathway and review timetable. My documentation would record the delusional basis of refusal, capacity reasoning, risk to others, legal authority, less restrictive attempts, collateral from father, rationale for any forced treatment, monitoring arrangements and review plan. That is what makes the decision clinically and legally defensible.`,
  },
  {
    id: "CAP-005",
    modelAnswer: `Mrs Bell's wish to return home must be heard respectfully, but the consultant task is to decide whether this is an unwise capacitous decision or an incapacitous decision driven by dementia-related inability to appreciate risk. Her statement, "I have lived there for fifty years and I am not going to a prison," expresses a powerful attachment to home and fear of institutionalisation. That does not by itself prove incapacity. Older adults are allowed to value home over safety if they can understand and weigh the risks. However, the stem then gives concrete evidence that she may not be able to do that: she was found "wandering at night in heavy rain," leaves the stove on, misses medications, cannot manage finances and "cannot recall being found by police." Those details point to impaired retention and appreciation of recent serious harm.

I would assess capacity decision-specifically for accommodation and care, not globally. I would ask Mrs Bell what happened before admission, what concerns others have about home, what could happen if she wanders at night or leaves the stove on, how she would manage medications, food, finances and emergencies, and what alternatives exist such as increased home supports, respite or residential care. The fact that she repeatedly asks when her husband is coming although he died six years ago suggests significant memory impairment and possible disorientation, which may interfere with her ability to retain and use information. If she cannot remember the police incident or appreciate that it could recur, she is unlikely to have capacity for the accommodation decision, even though her emotional preference for home is understandable.

The ethical tension is captured by the son's statement, "She has a right to make bad decisions." He is correct as a general principle, and I would acknowledge that. The question is whether Mrs Bell is making a bad decision with capacity or whether Alzheimer's disease is preventing her from understanding and weighing foreseeable harm. I would explain this distinction to the family. I would also avoid aligning automatically with the daughter who wants residential care, because family disagreement can distort the assessment. The consultant role is to provide an independent opinion based on functional evidence, not to vote with one sibling.

The risk if discharged home alone is not theoretical. The OT assessment shows stove risk, medication non-adherence and inability to manage finances; the police incident shows wandering in dangerous conditions. The geriatrician believes discharge home alone is unsafe, and I would integrate that multidisciplinary evidence into the capacity and disposition formulation. I would still consider least restrictive alternatives before concluding that residential care is required. Could intensive home care, meals, medication supervision, stove isolation, door sensors, family support, community nursing or respite reduce risk to an acceptable level? If not, and if capacity is absent, then guardianship or tribunal involvement may be required to authorise accommodation decisions.

The system pressure is explicit: "the residential care bed may be lost." I would not allow that pressure to shortcut the assessment or legal process. Losing a bed is frustrating and may have practical consequences, but it is not a lawful reason to declare someone incapable or move them without authority. I would tell the team and family that if the bed can be held while urgent capacity and guardianship steps occur, that should be explored, but the process must remain defensible. If there is immediate risk and she cannot return home while legal processes are pending, the team may need an interim lawful placement or hospital stay depending on local legislation.

My actions would include reviewing Mrs Bell directly, obtaining OT, geriatric, nursing and family collateral, assessing cognition and function, holding a family meeting, clarifying whether any valid substitute decision-maker exists, and involving social work/guardianship services. If she lacks capacity and no less restrictive home option is realistically safe, I would support a guardianship or tribunal pathway for accommodation and care. If she retains capacity, I would respect her decision but intensify risk mitigation and document that she understands the consequences. In either scenario, the model answer must not reduce the case to "dementia equals residential care." The defensible consultant formulation is that her values are real, the risks are concrete, capacity is decision-specific, family pressure cuts both ways, and the legal pathway must not be bypassed because a bed may be lost.`,
  },
];